Revamped "Why Async" section (#124)
rust-lang/async-book: src/01_getting_started/02_why_async.md

# Why Async?

> We all love how Rust allows us to write fast, safe software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We all love how Rust empowers us to write fast, safe software.
```
synon. more in line with official working

But how does asynchronous programming fit into this vision?

Asynchronous programming, or async for short, is a _concurrent programming model_
supported by an increasing number of programming languages.

> It lets you run a large number of concurrent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asynchronous programming lets you run a large number of concurrent
```

> tasks on a small number of OS threads, while preserving much of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tasks on a small number of OS threads while preserving much of the
```

> tasks on a small number of OS threads, while preserving much of the
> look and feel of ordinary synchronous programming, through the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tasks on a small number of OS threads while preserving much of the
look and feel of ordinary synchronous programming through Rust's
```

`async/await` syntax.

## Async vs other concurrency models

> Since the inception of concurrent programming, several models have been

Reviewer 2: Nit: this could be less verbose; e.g. "There are multiple models of concurrent programming. Although details vary between languages and frameworks, it's worth understanding how asynchronous programming compares to other models."

> Since the inception of concurrent programming, several models have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several models of concurrent programming for Rust have been
```

proposed with the intention of making concurrency simple and performant.

> Although details vary between different languages and frameworks,
> a brief overview of the main categories can help you understand how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An overview of the main categories can help us understand how
```

> asynchronous programming fits within the field of concurrent programming:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
asynchronous programming fits within the broader field of concurrent programming:
```

- **OS threads** don't require any changes to the programming model,

>   which makes them easier to

Reviewer 2: I'm surprised to hear you say this; it can be pretty difficult to reason about thread safety and to test threaded code (although Rust does make it easier).

Author: Ah yes, this is because _expressing concurrency_ is easy, but synchronization is hard (or super-human-hard, depending on who you ask). Clarified.

>   use than async. However, they come with a large performance overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  use than async. However, they do incur a large performance trade-off.
```

>   Thread pools can mitigate some of these costs, but not enough to support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  While thread-pools often mitigate some of these costs, mitigations are not enough support
```

  massive IO-bound workloads.

> - **Event-driven programming**, in conjunction with _callbacks_, can be very
>   performant, but tends to result in a verbose, "non-linear" control flow.
>   Data flow and error propagation is often hard to follow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Event-driven programming** in conjunction with _callbacks_ can be made
  performant, but tends to often result in a verbose, or "non-linear" control flow.
  Data-flow and error-propagation is often also hard to follow.
```

> - **Coroutines**, like threads, don't require changes to the programming model,
>   which makes them easy to use. Like async, they can also support a large
>   number of tasks. However, they abstract away low-level details that
>   are important for systems programming and custom runtime implementors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Coroutines** are similar to threads in that they don't require changes to the 
  programming model making them easy to use and much like async they can
  support a large number of concurrent tasks. However, coroutines will abstract away 
  low-level details which are important for systems programmers developing custom runtime
  implementations.
```

> - **The actor model** divides all concurrent computation into units called

Reviewer 2: This is cool, I haven't heard of this before! It sounds a bit like goroutines communicating via channels?

Author: Yes, there are similarities. If you're interested, Go is based on CSP, and the actor model is more general purpose - the actor model makes no distinction between actors on your device and on another device, for instance. There's a whole rabbit hole of interesting ideas to dig through - most of them are decades old but still relevant today.

  actors, which communicate through fallible message passing, much like

>   in distributed systems. It can be efficiently implemented, but it leaves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in distributed systems. The actor model can be efficiently implemented, but it leaves
```

>   many practical issues unanswered, such as flow control and retry logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  many practical issues unanswered such as flow control and retry logic.
```

> In short, asynchronous programming allows highly performant implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, asynchronous programming allows highly performant implementations
```

that are suitable for low-level languages like Rust, while providing
most of the ergonomic benefits of threads and coroutines.

## Async in Rust vs other languages

> Although asynchronous programming is supported in many languages, some
> details vary across implementations. Rust's implementation of async
> differs from most languages in a few ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asynchronous programming is supported in many languages though some
details vary across implementations. Rust's implementation of async 
encapsulates the following characteristics and constraints:
```

- **Futures are inert** in Rust and make progress only when polled. Dropping a
  future stops it from making further progress.

> - **Async is zero-cost** in Rust, and does not require heap allocations or

Reviewer 2: nit: I don't think everyone reading this will know what "zero-cost" means, while "no heap allocations" is much clearer. Could this be rephrased in more concrete terms, e.g. you don't pay a performance overhead by creating an async task?
Similarly, the previous bullet could become "Futures in Rust make progress only when polled. Dropping..."

Author: I wanted the bolded text to be short and catchy! I agree not everyone knows, but zero-cost abstractions is heavily used within Rust sales pitches, so I'll keep it :)

That said, I clarified it a lot!

  dynamic dispatch.
  As such, you can use async Rust in constrained environments, such as embedded
  systems.
- **No built-in runtime** is provided by Rust. Instead, runtimes are provided by
  community maintained crates.
- **Both single- and multithreaded** runtimes are available in Rust, which have
  different strengths and weaknesses.

> ## Async vs threads in Rust

Reviewer 2: This overlaps with the section comparing async to other concurrency models; it may be worth combining them. I would also explicitly explain why async is more performant than threads. Lastly, I know you mention the single and multi threaded runtimes above, and that async is compatible with threads at the end, but this section really does read like you have to choose one or the other.

Author: Re overlap: To some extent yes, but we have to cover the obvious options in Rust too in order to provide actionable decision criteria for prospective users. Open to making the distinction more clear.

Re why more performant: Added a sentence to this section - but not going into detail which is complex. The gist is that a small amount of threads can handle a large amount of tasks.

Re thread-async interop: I think it's ok, because it will generally be a binary choice. An unrelated comment softened the wording a bit too.

> The most obvious alternative to async in Rust is using OS threads, either

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary alternative to async in Rust is using OS threads, either
```

directly through [`std::thread`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/thread/)

> or indirectly through a thread pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or indirectly through a thread-pool.
```

Migrating from threads to async or vice versa
typically requires major refactoring work, both in terms of implementation and
(if you are building a library) any exposed public interfaces. As such,

> picking the model that suits your needs early can save you a lot of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
picking the model that suits your needs early can save a lot of development time.
```

Note that asynchronous programming is not _better_ than threads, but different.

> If you don't need async for performance reasons, threads can often be

Reviewer 2: This reads a bit confusingly; it sounds like you're about to talk about situations where OS threads are better, but instead it is more similar to the pros/cons comparison from above.

Author: Yes, good catch. Moved para down.

> a simpler option. Specifically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the simpler alternative. Specifically:
```

**OS threads** are suitable for a small number of tasks, since threads come with
CPU and memory overhead. Spawning and switching between threads

> is quite expensive—even idle threads consume valuable system resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is quite expensive as even idle threads consume system resources.
```

> A thread pool library can help mitigate some of these costs, but not all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A thread-pool library can mitigate some but not all of these costs.
```

> However, threads let you reuse existing synchronous code without significant
> code changes—no particular programming model is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since threads let you reuse existing synchronous code no 
particularly unique programming model is required.
```

In some operating systems, you can also change the priority of a thread,
which is useful for drivers and other latency sensitive applications.

**Async** provides significantly reduced CPU and memory
overhead, especially for workloads with a
large amount of IO-bound tasks, such as servers and databases.
All else equal, you can have orders of magnitude more tasks than OS threads.

> That said, async Rust can result in larger binary sizes, both due to the state
> machines that are generated from async functions and because each executable
> needs to bundle an async runtime.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, async Rust results in larger binary blobs due to the state
machines generated from async functions and since each executable
bundles an async runtime.

```

### Example: Concurrent downloading

> In this example, our goal is to download two web pages concurrently.
> In a typical threaded application, we need to spawn threads
> to achieve concurrency:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example our goal is to download two web pages concurrently.
In a typical threaded application we need to spawn threads
to achieve concurrency:
```

```rust,ignore
{{#include ../../examples/01_02_why_async/src/lib.rs:get_two_sites}}
```

> However, downloading a web page is a small task; creating a thread

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, downloading a web page is trivial; creating a thread
```

for such a small amount of work is quite wasteful. For a larger application, it
can easily become a bottleneck. In async Rust, we can run these tasks
concurrently without extra threads:

```rust,ignore
{{#include ../../examples/01_02_why_async/src/lib.rs:get_two_sites_async}}
```

> Here, no extra threads are created. Additionally, all function calls are statically
> dispatched, and there are no heap allocations!
> However, we need to write the code to be asynchronous in the first place,
> which this book will help you achieve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here no extra threads are created and all function calls are statically
dispatched so there were no heap allocations!
However, we needed the skill to write the code to be asynchronous in the first place
which this book will help you achieve.
```

> ## Other concurrency models

Reviewer 2: Is this section header supposed to be here? It doesn't fit well with the content below. A short summary paragraph might be a better ending to this section.

Author: Changed to "Custom concurrency models in Rust" to be more clear what it is about. A summary section may be a good idea though..

> On a last note, Rust doesn't force you to choose between threads and async.
> You can use both models within the same application, which can be
> useful when you have mixed threaded and async dependencies.
> In fact, you can even use a different concurrency model altogether,
> such as event-driven programming, as long as you find a library that
> implements it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ultimately Rust doesn't force you to choose between threads and async.
You can use both models within the same application evenl when you
have mixed threaded and async dependencies!
In fact, you can even use a different concurrency model altogether,
such as event-driven programming, as long as you have a library that
implements your custom model.
```
